---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "Biotech Startups"
description: "Why is there no biotech startup bubble?"
category: posts
tags: [biotech]
image:
published: true
---

The reason that biotech startups will never be as successful (with respect to size and profit) as tech startups is simple. Tech startups address wants, biotech startups address needs. Do we really need emoji classifications of our Snapchat friends? No. But someone got paid the big bucks to think of the idea, have meetings to discuss which emojis to use, and then spend time programming and debugging.

The target markets of people with wants and people with needs are different, especially in regards to expendable income. People with wants are yuppy San Franciscans who spend their weekends browsing neighborhood farmers markets, buy $5 gourmet coffee daily, and pay for music subscription services. People with needs are patients dying with cancer, suffering from Alzheimers, and crippled by genetic diseases, who oftentimes have already spent entire fortunes on healthcare.

Thus, the solution for biotech startups to be successful and profitable is this: address wants. Fitbit has been one of the early extortionists of this principle, but they could take it a step further. A device to count the number of times you blink in a day. A wearable to track the duration, quantity, and composition of bowel movements. An accessory to measure the growth rate of the hairs on our heads.

Isn't biotech exciting! Forget serious diseases that need treatments and cures! Where's the want for that?
