---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "Ferpa Access"
description: For posterity.
category: posts
tags: [FERPA]
---
Exact copy of common app and SAT Score Report.

Beginning of Evaluation:  
Page 1:  
Andrew Tsai  
Male  
Asian  
03/18/1995  

Official Decision: Admit
Cmte (committee) Decision: Admit
Reader Decision: Admit
App Type: RD
BME Decision: BME Admit

Rigor: *M* V D A L
Caclulus Taken:
Calculus Grade:

1st Comment (redacted title), 02/01/2013: Calc(10th), Bio, Lang, Stats, Phys, Gov, Japanese = 7 (they missed chem, possibly b/c i didn't take the class)
2nd Comment (redacted title), 02/02/2013:  
Eagle Scout, several i'ships and comp. (Med Cntr, Stanford research on sustainability), JSA(4-P), JNHS(4-VP), Public Forum(4) 
Essay 1 - on eczema, summary, lived independently in SF
Essay 2 - interested in "new medical solns", summary
C(hoir) Rec - "cool... a leader b/c leads by example"
Music T Rec - humor, quick to laugh, creative
Lang T Rec - exhuberant, insightful
Sci T - notes dedication, intellectual engagement

A lot to like here! Andy emerges as a tough student + engaged participant in the world around him (though he has done well in numerous sci related comp, he's a JSA member and an Eagle Scout too a bit more diverse than the standard). Add to this terrific metrics, a substantive interest in engr(not MD-bound) + some of the most engaging teacher comments to come out of LHS - and one has a really terrific scholar and community citizen. Would add life and levity to JHU Engr w/ real intellectual rigor and talent. Enthusiastic admit/admit to BME for strong performance and yield tool.

3rd Comment (redacted title), 03/13/2013: ENG Comm(ittee): good for jhu good for bme; admit to both

Page 2 (a bunch of checkbox fields):
No diploma
GED
Low grades
Impressive essay
Early grad
Home school
Failed
Noteworthy
Prev app
Suspended
Criminal
CTY
ROTC
School Group
HOME
Ben dependent
JH Employed Parent
Fac/Staff support
AO Noted VIP
Follow VP?
Peabody
AO-Indicated FA (financial aid?)
Baltimore Scholars
BME decision

After the flood of FERPA requests, Yale and Stanford destroyed their records, which begs the question: What did they have to hide?  Also interesting to note is that Hopkins took 2 emails and well over 45 days to get back to me. What took them so long? Were they "preparing" my documents for me?